Introduction
Personal computing has been the order of the day for many years now in organizations with system
administrators having to carry out repetitive and tedious tasks across different personal computers and
software platforms. The ever-increasing numbers of available personal computers in the world today are
contributed to by the lifecycle policies of organizations which require a refresh every 5 year or so. The
increased energy requirements, cost requirements, higher storage requirements, software, operating
systems and administrative challenges are critical indicators for a more centralized approach to
computing. Virtual Desktop Infrastructures (VDI) provide a central management center from where
personalized computing resources are allocated to end users and permission to applications and services
provided based on predetermined policies. This is in addition to providing long term solutions to the
challenges. This project work presents the detailed comparison and analysis of personal computing and
personalized computing as presented by personal computers and VDIs respectively. VDI leverages on the
power of virtualization to provide individualized desktops and applications to end users with a wide array
of access options including BYOD (Bring Your own device) and remote access.
Allianz Technology SE is the Allianz Global Group's internal shared services provider. The key purpose
of Allianz Technology is to transform Allianz Global Group into a digital group. To achieve this, Allianz
Technology provides a robust, secure and efficient IT infrastructure, as well as ensuring that new
technologies and channels support the design, distribution and maintenance of the Allianz Technology
products. One of the core services of Allianz Technology to the Allianz Global Group is the Allianz
Virtual Client (AVC). The AVC utilizes cutting edge private cloud technology to address 3 crucial issues:
a. Digital Standardization of the entire Allianz Global Group.
b. Enhanced data security
c. Cost effective and flexible workplaces

This report is structured as follows to ensure proper understanding of the scope of the project. The
introductory part provides an overview of the project, a general background provides insight to the current
state of the project context in a bid to highlight the technological shift occurring in the personal computing
sphere, while reviewing correlating literatures; with a bird’s eye view on the evolution of personal
computing. Next, we delve into the world of virtual desktops and virtualization as a whole; being the
scope of this project. The architecture, different utilization modes, cost of implementation and build a case
for adoption via possible Return on Investment (ROI) using case studies. Present advancements, future
improvements and a general conclusion will round off this paper.




1. Background

1.1. Definition of VDI
Virtual Desktop Infrastructure (VDI) is the emerging desktop services delivery technology positing as the
alternative to the traditional personal computing desktop delivery [13] [14] [15]. The general idea of VDI
refers to a concept where operating system and applications are hosted and managed on a single/multiple
hardware to be shared and accessed by end users without the awareness (operation-wise) that these
resources are being shared. The end-user connection to the VDI environment is moderated by remote
access protocols like RDP, Microsoft Remote Desktop Protocol (RDP), Citrix High Definition Experience
(HDX) or VMware Personal Computing over Internet Protocol (PCoIP) [16] [17]. Access to the desktop
services are via end user devices mainly known as Thin clients, which are hardware devices specifically
designed to handle virtualization systems. Other autonomous access via fat clients and end user smart
devices within the local corporate network or with internet access is a possibility. Using a setup similar to
the terminal services of a combination of keyboard, mouse, monitor unit in all connection with the Thin
client or the use of any personal computer or smart devices with internet access, end users are able to
access desktop services such as operating systems, applications (Microsoft Word,MS Excel, Acrobat PDF
reader. etc) and manage resources like they would on a typical fat-desktop personal computer irrespective
of the physical location of the end user.
Traditional personal computing is based on a model whereby many personalized computers are executing
tasks with the aid of individual operating systems and applications [21]. The management tasks of these
environments such as configurations and reconfiguration (maybe a complete configuration change),
installations and uninstallations, and security policies are time consuming, challenging, expensive and
require dedicated on-site support at all locations. The high churn rate of these personal computers and
their apparent underutilization despite the high CAPEX cost result to low or even zero ROI. With a VDI
environment, the idea is for all the computing is done within a central station like a capable datacenter
while end users access desktop services like operating systems and applications remotely over a sufficient
network using remote access protocols. This means of accessing desktop service is not without its cons
due the minimum bandwidth required for a starting and sustaining a virtual desktop session. The upside to
VDI is that the cost of management is significantly lower as all administrative and support processes are
centralized within the VDI host environment. This naturally reduces the on-site labor required, centralizes
software and hardware changes/upgrades, capacity extensions and creates a single OPEX point for
organizations [6].


1.2. History of Personal Computing
From the late 1800s to late 1970s, the evolution of computing has majorly been industry-centric. Focusing
more on providing high capacity, speed and storage for industrial and governmental processes, thus
leaving only the option of physically massive computational entities [21] [32]. This left no room for
personal interfacing with the computational powers of the computer. From the early 1980s, personal
computers started making their way into people’s homes with the advent of “Acorn”, the first personal
computer commercially made available by IBM [23] [28]. The years leading to the new millennium
brought with it a rapid change in the ways organizations viewed and managed computing due the
overwhelming amount of data available being generated by the millions of individuals with access to a
personal computer and a larger network of both personal and industrial computers called the “World Wide
Web” [28]. Organizations began to adopt the collaborative approach to work in which several people
working on a particular project, take on individual units of the project and merge all separate units into
one larger unit after completion. It became apparent that this made work move at a faster rate and allowed
for a lot of creativity. A few years down the line, a realization was arrived at that for the churn rate of
personal laptops was way higher in comparison with the ROI on the investment made on it but without an
alternative at it were, all that was then possible was to try and stretch the lifespan of the PCs enough to
produce some kind of ROI or at worst a break-even situation [3]. It is the combination of the technologies
of the world wide web and personal computing that has given rise to the newer technologies such as
“Cloud Computing” and as an aftereffect virtual computing. Since the emergence of virtualization over 15
years ago, it has morphed from the performance and storage problems ridden technology into one with a
more enhanced architecture, intelligent infrastructure, top notch security and infinite features that more
than suffices for the demands of virtual desktops services and other cloud computing services such as
Software as a Service (SaaS), Infrastructure as a Service (IaaS) and Platform as a Service (PaaS) [11].

1.2.1. Why VDI
It has become clear that the servers and other high-end IT infrastructures were being under-utilized and
ROI on them was near impossible to achieve due to the rising operating cost associated with them and the
end users of the services they render. It therefore became pertinent to focus on the high cost points of
every organization’s IT infrastructure and propose a solution that compresses the cost of the overall
implementation and maintenance of the IT infrastructure while adding more services to the infrastructure
at no significant extra cost. This became the sole driver of the VDI technology [27] [31].

1.2.2. The VDI Trend
Virtual desktop technology made its debut into the personal computing sphere in the early 2000s with the
promise of improving on all things remote computing especially with respect to access of corporate
resources and ease the process of IT infrastructure and services management. This introduction was a big
disappointment as the technological demand far surpassed the available technology VDI could provide at
the time [11]. The major pain points then are detailed:

1. Performance: The main letdown for VDI after its introduction was the constant poor performance
of the virtual desktops. Due to the technological gap, VDIs found it difficult to manage remote
desktop sessions, large files and increased network load. The absence of sessions monitoring, end
user data analysis, inadequate QoS configurations, storage technology not matching VDI
requirements, constant hardware failure and even human error due to knowledge gap all
contributed to the failure of VDI at that time.

2. Hidden Costs & Complexities: The selling point at the entry point for VDI was the ability to
centrally control and administer all IT infrastructure - this was only going to be a possibility if the
implementation was done appropriately. The ideal VDI setup required that the backend
infrastructure be fully redundant, be easily expandable on storage, network and infrastructure
levels. These requirements are costs that are typically not included in the calculation of the TCO
(total cost of ownership) of non-corporate VDI implementations. The centralization of all IT
infrastructure though a benefit brought with it the complexity of dealing with the high power and
cooling demands required for operation, the intricate licensing systems and the high level of
expertise all contributed in turning corporations in other cheaper and less complex directions.


2.3. VDI 2.0: Advanced VDI Technology
Since its initial failure, VDI took a backseat while most of the supporting technologies continued to
advance independently. The 3 pillars of VDI [22]: software, hardware and infrastructure architecture had
been the bane of VDI during its introduction (hardware and architecture especially), now boasted of major
advancements that could now cater for the needs of VDIs in providing high-performance virtual desktops
and high-availability infrastructure. The ability to design a VDI environment in which functions that are
not directly affecting end-user experience while still retaining an optimal data processing infrastructure
made VDI a more endearing technology. The introduction of high capacity and multi-tiered networks with
matching speeds and protocols add to the evidenced improved performance of virtual desktops [38] [19].
Security solutions that provide multi-tiered security from the datacenter, over the network and down to the
user endpoint cover all the pain points of earlier VDI implementations and therefore endear many
organizations to the idea of VDI adoption. Taking performance further, present day VDI allows
organizations to attain and retain industry compliance standards by the implementation of verified and
audited PCI or HIPAA HITECH compliant virtual desktops at a much more reduced cost as when
implemented without [32].
These advancements opened a new service offering for service providers with the introduction of Desktop
as a Service (DaaS). This makes it easier for businesses to opt for cloud based virtual desktops that are
both scalable and cost effective with minimal in-house support required. This allows the in-house IT team
to focus on more productive tasks as the heavy lifting of the desktop services infrastructure has been taken
off them. This approach also affords organizations the opportunity to have VDI experts at their service and
can thus discuss their future requirements to get a near accurate forecast of cost and performance level to
expect [37].

2.3.1. VDI: Applications and Considerations
Virtualization and its applications have recently become popular and more utilized by different industries
and organizations to reduce their baseline costs and provide desktop services amongst others to their end
users or clients. This recent turn towards hosting services on virtualized infrastructure stems from the fact
that infrastructure owners have come to the realization that more value can be gotten from their present
infrastructure with the right technology and technical know-how [5]. The problems associated with the
traditional desktop services delivery [25] including high energy costs, IT peripherals expenses,
unmanaged data storage and performance are greatly reduced if not completely eliminated with the move
to VDI.

2.3.2. Case for VDI
It is imperative to concisely discuss the pros that virtualized desktop services bring to the highlighted
problems associated with the traditional desktop services delivery and provide researched evidence
showing the benefits. The benefits of VDI can be categorized into cost and operational benefits.
Most researches are of the school of thought that virtualizing desktop services would bring about
substantial cost savings for organizations. According to a Gartner Inc. report, “virtualization will have the
highest-impact trend changing infrastructure and operations through the year 2012 and beyond” [5]. The
demand for virtualization has even exceeded that report’s estimations due to its resultant effect of
drastically reducing the number of physical servers which leads to cost savings on power utilization and
resource distribution, while maximizing capacity of existing server architectures. The Total Cost of
Ownership (TCO) is also greatly reduced as 50% of the TCO of a personalized computing organization is
claimed by IT support and peripheral costs. [5] [2]. More cost savings will become evident once the
transition from individualized licensing and security to central management is completed.
The operational benefits of implementing a VDI throughout an organization are well documented [22]
[24] [46]. The most important yet basic affordance of VDI is the ease and flexibility of end user
ownership. This means that all end users will get a standard yet consistent virtualized desktop services
experience irrespective of the geographical location and the device used for accessing the VDI services.
The security of organizational data is paramount to any technology decision and this is where VDI
becomes most beneficial. As the provisioning, storage and support of all virtual desktops are centrally
managed, so also is the security of the VDI. Policies can be configured to dictate the behavior and
accessibility into and out of the virtual environment. Installation of application can be done centrally and
limited to only power users while all end users are presented with a standard bouquet of desktop services
out of the box.


2.3.3. Case against VDI
It is also important to discuss the cases against implementation of VDI for organizations. A common place
argument is the fact that management of virtual desktop systems are difficult to manage. As highlighted by
Carlson (2014), “Virtual desktop implementations and management are time consuming, requires different
difficult processes and there is the constant worry about breach of data security.” [42]. As is the case with
all high security deployments, any VDI is only as good and secure as its implementation. With only local
access, the level of security threats stays compact but in the case that the VDI was implemented for remote
access, the threat level is increased and several security measures have to be put in place and monitored
for Zero-Day threats [43]. Different firewall zones, DMZ and access lists need to be created to control
internal and external access, and ensure that sensitive data remains in the data center. The argument here is
that systems administrators usually watch the datacenter domain with the same level of security as is
required (more or less) for VDI.
Another argument against VDI is the fact that a VDI implementation is only considered optimal if there is
high availability and redundancy. This means replicating the same exact expensive production VDI setup
to only serve as the failover of the entire infrastructure. Anything short of this is considered risky as any
failure or security breach in the production VDI environment brings the services to a halt and as such
defeats the purposes of VDI. This high capital expenditure (CAPEX) is the usual deal breaker for most
organizations looking to consider a move to VDI [46] [3] [7].


3. VDI Technology Alternatives
Virtual desktop implementation is not some standalone unique technology that is making its way into the
computing world but actually a result of combining the best parts of some legacy technologies, combining
them and adding extra functionalities for a smoother experience. Some of the legacy technologies in focus
can also be considered as alternatives to VDI and can be used to implement desktop services with similar
features as the VDI. Examples include the following:
a. Remote Desktop Services (RDS): This is a Microsoft Windows technology which allows a
windows server provide users access to Windows-based applications or a complete Windows
desktop. The applications or the windows desktops are installed on a Remote Desktop Session
Host (RD Session Host) and can be accessed within a local network or over the internet. RDS
offers some of the Pros of a full scale VDI like central management and low OPEX. Its major con
is the lack of flexibility in the technology being that it isn’t future-proof [35].
b. Session-based Virtualization: Users access different sessions to one desktop environment in a
virtualized server. The difference to VDI is that only one desktop environment is utilized by all users
via sessions instead of the separate desktop environment per user that is the case with VDI. It is also
generally easier to set up for low number users session environment as sessions of up to 100 users do
not require the use of a hypervisor. Larger implementations are achieved by hosting the shared desktop
environment in a virtual machine within a server. Multiple Virtual machines on several servers can be
combined to carry out the deployment of thousands of users and as such scale up [10] [37].